
Friend: Okay, yeah. So, we're sitting here with Owen and he wants to talk about how he understands his job appeal in the market and his options and potentials, and what he wants, what he likes, what he doesn’t like.

Owen: No, I was saying that... so, what I really need right now is to figure out what is happening in the sense that I’m not getting interviews. Is it because my resumes are not being picked up due to the way I structured it, or is it because I’m actually lacking certain skills? Which I doubt, because I had worked in communications before, I had worked in journalism, and a lot of communications jobs would welcome applicants from those backgrounds, right?

So, what is happening here? I don't know. Another thing that I'm trying to figure out, and this is very nitty-gritty, like my resume—I've now broken it up into two parts: communications experience and journalism experience. So, in terms of the timeline, it’s not exactly chronological. So does that throw off AI when they are—when it is trying to screen my resume? Does that mean that because I’ve broken up my resume into different timelines and bucketed them into this particular work experience and that particular work experience, but the timelines are all over the place, does that affect the odds of my resume being picked up? I don't know. I don't even know how to find that out. Can you help?

Friend: Let's talk more. So what do you actually want? Like, what’s the ideal situation?

Owen: Job situation?

Friend: The perfect job.

Owen: I’m going to set journalism aside because that’s a completely different story. For now, I want a full-time job in communications, either with any kind of organization, big or small. And I really want the work to be interesting. I don’t want to work in a communications team where what they do is not valued by those higher up, because it’s a bullshit job.

Friend: Yeah.

Owen: Also, I want a job that pays at least $100,000 a year.

Friend: Canadian?

Owen: Mhmm.

Friend: What about journalism though?

Owen: There are not that many journalism jobs, and the kinds of journalism jobs that I’m interested in are very limited. I want to go back to China to work as a foreign correspondent, but such job opportunities don’t come along that much here in Canada. It has to be something interesting, like, let’s say an immigration reporter, a reporter who writes on a specific beat or topic. It’s also a highly competitive field.

Friend: What would you say is your specialization in journalism?

Owen: Reporting, writing.

Friend: Like what niche?

Owen: I ask good questions. I do.

Friend: No, like, agriculture?

Owen: No. I have topics that I’m interested in, but I wouldn’t consider myself an expert on immigration or an expert on economy. I think one of the things that I learned in journalism is you can pick up a new topic, learn about it, and write about it in a way that readers will find useful.

Friend: So what’s been your latest? You went to school... what was the degree that you did?

Owen: I’m doing a journalism fellowship, and the fellowship is ending soon, in about a month.

Friend: And that’s at U of T? What is it called?

Owen: It’s just a journalism fellowship at Massey College at University of Toronto.

Friend: And how’s that been?

Owen: It’s great because I love being a student again.

Friend: Have you met people there?

Owen: I have. I met a lot of actually very excellent younger writers who really impressed me. I was like, when I was your age, I couldn’t write shit, really. But also, like, I partly did this fellowship because I couldn’t find a job that I would actually want. So being able to be a student again is very refreshing to me because—I don’t know if this is something that a lot of people relate to—when you’re working, unless it’s something that you’re really, really passionate about, you don’t get intellectually stimulated that much. And now I have that luxury of, A, not having to worry too much at least on a short-term [about] my income, and then going to school and picking courses that I’m genuinely interested in. So I think the learning, compared to my past educational experience, has been more active. And I’ve realized being a student again, it’s not the specific knowledge you’re going to come away with, it’s the way in which you think about the world. I find that most valuable.

Friend: What were some ways that that changed for you as a result? Or skills that you gained? I mean you read a lot, you read like a ton.

Owen: I try to read a lot. I’ve definitely been reading a lot more. In terms of how has that changed me, I think I’ve started to think about the things that wouldn’t cross my mind before. And this is a very specific example, like how you think about citizenship, how do you think about borders, how borders shift. It’s not something that I thought a lot about before. For example, the fact that there’s pre-screening at one of the airports in Toronto. That’s actually, if you think about it, it’s borders shifting, right?

Friend: At the airport?

Owen: Yeah.

Friend: What’s the pre-screening for? Security?

Owen: Going to the U.S. Because if you’re flying out of... wait, it’s the other airport, sorry, I misremembered. So at Pearson, you go through American customs in Canada. That’s like borders shifting.

Friend: And that’s a new thing?

Owen: That’s not a new thing, but that thing has been there for a while. So you’re thinking about it, right? And because I had done this a few times, it wasn’t until someone was discussing this in a class about immigration and citizenship, I was like, "Whoa, that actually makes a lot of sense." And you learn a lot about historical background. And I think it’s something like that, right? How borders are shifting, why has there been such a big change to Canada's immigration system? Are immigrants partly to blame, or are they simply being scapegoats? And also writing, really writing.

Friend: How much did you write?

Owen: Not a lot. Bad. I’m a bad cat.

Friend: But you read a lot.

Owen: Oh, that’s so true. I’ve read a lot more than I’ve written. And that’s very useful.

Friend: So you were doing an audit of the courses, so you weren’t a real student?

Owen: No. So I go to classes, I engage with the reading materials. For example, last semester I took eight classes, but I only went to lectures for two-ish, and then the rest I would just read on my own.

Friend: And then did you talk to the professors as an auditor?

Owen: Only one professor. Yeah. But I have read more than I’ve written and that’s also been fascinating to me because reading other people—I don’t know how to put this—I only picked up reading as a habit really, really late in my life compared to most people. And I’ve also realized most good writers, without any exception, most good writers are good readers or avid readers. And I was a little bit ashamed that I was not like that.

Friend: Talk about the book you want to write that you haven’t started yet.

Owen: Ugh, I couldn’t even finish the second article.

Friend: Can you be nice?

Owen: I am. I am working on another draft on "Canadian Niceness," but I’ve been working very, very painfully slow.

Friend: But that’s something that you like.

Owen: That’s something that I’ve thought a lot about, that I at least made it a goal to at least finish a second article and possibly pitch it somewhere this year. I have one more month, and maybe if I get lucky I might be able to finish a draft.

Friend: Pitch the draft?

Owen: No, to finish a draft.

Friend: Do you want to pitch it?

Owen: I’ve already spoken to editors about it before and they’ve shown some interest. So it’s a matter of just putting pen to paper.

Friend: So, if you were going to apply today, what places would you... you’ve already applied to CNN. Where else have you applied or do you want to apply?

Owen: I’ve applied to a couple of jobs, quite a number of jobs in the past month. This job that I really came close to getting, I didn’t get it. It was with an insurance company.

Friend: Insurance company? Communication or something?

Owen: It’s a managing editor role, so I would be managing a small team of writers. To me, I really wanted that job because, A, it would give me managerial experience, leadership experience, but I kind of also want to see what’s it like to work on the content team of a big business. Like, how do you use content to drive business? Like blogs, SEO kind of thing?

Owen: Yeah, it’s a content team, on the content marketing.

Friend: To bring in traffic and bring in leads and stuff like that?

Owen: Yeah. It’s very editorial.

Friend: You liked that that was appealing to you?

Owen: It is appealing to me. And they came back to me and said the position has been filled, but "Hey, if you want to do some freelance writing for us, let’s talk."

Friend: So now just say like five random other things so you can just expand. Like logistics, what you like, what would be the dream job? Just talk more.

Owen: Oh, another reason why I wanted that job at the insurance company is because they’re literally down the road. And I want that, and they don’t ask you to come back five days a week, which is important to me. Not that I mind going, but because I still want to keep my side gig that I do four days a week, meaning that I have to get up early-ish in the morning, 7:00 or so, and I have to read Chinese news for a couple of hours. I contribute to this pretty popular China-focused newsletter, and my boss is in D.C. So I only help him with a section, and I don’t want to lose that side gig because, A, I really like the job, and B, it brings me additional income, which is great.

Friend: Right. But do you want to go to the office or you don’t? You want fully remote or like hybrid?

Owen: I want hybrid.

Friend: So if you want hybrid the office has to be in Toronto because you live in Toronto. Couldn’t be in U.S. or anything like that. Would you move to U.S.?

Owen: I would. So my plan is... it doesn't really matter. My plan is, ideally, I want to be able to find a job in downtown Toronto within walking distance from where I live. I know that’s very specific because I walk everywhere. But that also gives me time to finish my newsletter in the morning. So I could leave my place around 8:30, that should give me some time to finish the newsletter if I worked a little bit the night before.

So yeah, I still want that. But also I need to look—I need to cast my net a little bit wider. If there is a really good... and I have to emphasize this really big time, I’m not against the idea of moving to another country, say the U.S. or even back to China, if it’s a job that I’m really, really, really passionate about. I could just rent out [my place].

Friend: So you’re kind of in a phase of your life that your job still matters a lot too.

Owen: Matters a lot. I don’t know how AI, Mr. AI, is going to take this in.

Friend: Don't worry about that.

Owen: If I were to stay in Toronto, my bottom line is that I have to... the job that I’m going to take on, it doesn’t have to be a dream job, it doesn’t have to be something that I’m super-uber-super passionate about, but the bottom line is that I cannot work at a place where I feel miserable. And I’ve been there before. So my last job, the pay was pretty good, the workload was nonexistent. I was miserable. I hated my job.

Friend: Because of the office culture?

Owen: Because the office culture... in a sense that my colleagues... I think I told you the story, like the last job that I really hated. On the first day, one of my new colleagues basically pulled me aside and we went for a walk, and we were meeting for the first time and she was telling me how much she hated the job and how much she hated the boss. And when I asked her, "Why don't you start looking for a new job?" and her literal response was, "Oh, I have been here for more than 15 years. I have really great generous vacation time, I have government pension. I am going to keep coasting until I retire." And it’s so funny, she recently called me and was like, "I got let go. Can I talk?" Anyway.

So that is my bottom line. If it’s a job in Toronto, I don’t have to love-love-love it, but the bottom line is that—I know that’s a really hard line to draw—like I absolutely cannot do a job that I hate. But the reason why I’m saying that is because I think a lot of people I’ve met could do that. Yeah, I cannot. I can’t. So there’s that. But if I were to move to the U.S. or China, it better be a job that I’m actually really, really passionate about, or there’s tremendous growth opportunity. Because you’re going to have to leave and all the trouble, the logistics. But there’s something about going to the office here that is appealing to you, that you want to wake up, walk to the office.

Owen: Preferably two days a week. Two or three days a week. Yeah. That’s better than just being fully on your own and isolated. Or I don’t mind 100% remote either.

Friend: What’s the deal with your newsletter? How successful is that?

Owen: It has a lot of... tens of thousands [of readers]. Tens of thousands.

Friend: Are like serious avid readers?

Owen: Yeah.

Friend: Is it on Substack?

Owen: It’s number five in news on Substack.

Friend: Oh yeah? Geez, what is it called?

Owen: Sinocism. For the next five to ten years and allow them to have half a million subscribers.

Friend: Half a million subscribers? And it’s a paid newsletter? Does it say how often they read?

Owen: I don’t know because I’m only...

Friend: And then you’re commissioned to write that?

Owen: Yeah.

Friend: Okay, so you don’t get the revenue of that directly?

Owen: No.

Friend: If you wanted to just jump ship and do your own Substack, is that a... or you have like an agreement that you should not, you cannot do that? That would be a betrayal of them?

Owen: No, like I could do whatever I want.

Friend: So why don't you? Do you like something like that?

Owen: Because he has a big following and he has a very thorough newsletter. So I’m just, what’s the word, I’m piggybacking in a way. Like I’m contributing to like a small part.

Friend: How big of his thing are you? Like what percentage of his thing are you?

Owen: Pretty tiny, I would say. Like 10, 20 percent of it. So the deal is that, depending on the news of the day, I write in Google Docs and it’s usually always six to eight items per day that I would submit. So these are six or eight news items summarized.

Friend: So what’s your process like for that? You read first?

Owen: I read the Chinese sources, I only do Chinese sources every day and I pick whatever I think is newsworthy.

Friend: What time you have to wake up at a certain time?

Owen: Yeah. Wake up morning, because the newsletter goes out by the end of the day, and his expectation, my boss’s expectation is that I submit before noon. But because I had been doing that side gig when I was working full-time, so I’ve developed this habit of trying to finish the newsletter before my full-time job starts. So that would be 9:00, I would finish before 9:00.

Friend: Gotcha. And then it would go... you don’t do any editing yourself. Okay, so say a little bit about your specialty. You don’t do editing, you do journalism. So when you were at New York Times...

Owen: I also do editing. Well, like nowadays I do.

Friend: What things do you do and what things do you not do?

Owen: When I was in journalism, when I was a reporter, I report, I write. That’s pretty much it.

Friend: Research?

Owen: Yeah, research, I write. Research, write, go talk to people. That’s pretty much what every journalist would do, but I didn’t edit because I wasn’t an editor. But now I want to.

Friend: How about ideas? Do your ideas come from you?

Owen: It’s a bit of a mix. Like sometimes your editors assign stories to you, and often times a lot of stories you see on the wall, on my wall, my wall of honor... by the end, by the way, as we are talking here there are newspapers on the wall that Owen has written that he’s proud of. Page one stories. Every single story I pitched them myself.

Friend: So how did you come up with that armpit one? China armpit one?

Owen: Because I didn’t know what deodorant was before I wrote this story. I mean long story short, I was couchsurfing, there was a couple that I was hosting from Belarus and they were like, "Where can we find deodorant?" And it took me a while to realize what that is because Chinese people don’t use it. And another thing is that you cannot really find deodorant in like a regular Chinese supermarket. It’s something marketed, it’s something sold at more like upscale supermarket in China. And I was like, why? If this is something that’s like a daily daily thing that people use in the West, how come like Chinese people don’t use it? So I got really, really, really intrigued, right? Again, coming from ignorance because I didn’t even know what deodorant was. And then a series of questions like, why? And also crucially, you know how China being the world’s second largest economy, there’s a lot of buyers in the country, right? So for every single business—ice cream maker, deodorant maker, bra maker, condom makers—it’s a big market, right?

So I was like, I did some... so I know that they’ve been doing marketing on deodorant in China, but how has that not helped those deodorant makers kind of, you know, make an impact there? Yeah, that’s how I ended up writing the story. And you kind of liked that curiosity kind of thing. Because it means that you have to talk to those people in the business.

Friend: How many people on average do you talk to for each of these news things?

Owen: It really depends. For example, for that deodorant story, it’s not like a one or two day operation, right? Because that’s the good thing about working for a bigger publication, it’s not a time-sensitive story. Because I did have to cultivate sources... not necessarily cultivating sources, but really talk to people to bring the story to life, right? So if I were to break it down, that story, it’s a business story. Like what is the thesis for the story? Like the focus of the story is that, yes, China is a big market, but because of cultural differences and this and that, some of the Western producers or Western companies have had notable failures when trying to enter the Chinese market, and these are the reasons, right? And deodorant, you know, cultural and even like I looked up research as to like why Chinese people are less prone to body odor. So there is a lot of research that goes on. Like you have your hypothesis, right? You’re trying to look things up to back up whatever you’re...

Friend: You don’t have any pressure of when you need to deliver on this?

Owen: No.

Friend: How many months did you take for that?

Owen: I would say probably a few weeks. And the story sat there for a long time.

Friend: So you set at what point you want to...

Owen: I would give my editor a deadline.

Friend: Oh, did you do all of that alone or did you have assistance or collaborators?

Owen: No, of course I did it all by myself. Of course not all by myself, but I had a really, really good... I did a lot of the reporting, original research, so that’s all mine. But in order to shape this into a coherent piece, I would have to say the editor did a lot of heavy lifting. And this is the luxury associated with working with the New York Times. It doesn't really matter if you’re an intern or if you’re a Pulitzer-winning reporter, everyone’s copy gets edited really, really heavily by an amazing editor.

Friend: Okay, two last questions. One is, where do you see yourself—it’s a little bit cliché—but like where do you want to be in five years or like where do you want the peak of your career to be? The other is any exiting thoughts?

Owen: I’ve thought quite a bit about it because I’m turning 40 soon. I’m an old cat. It’s really two routes and these things are separate, completely separate. If I’m still able to make it back to journalism, I would want to go back to China, maybe work for the Globe and Mail as their China correspondent. That would be dream-come-true moment.

Friend: Not New York Times?

Owen: I just don’t see it as much of a possibility because I’m not that good. And it would be more prestigious. The reason why I’m saying that is because I’ve realized that I can be a bigger fish in a small pond. So that’s more realistic for me to even dream about, right? And be a manager kind of a thing? I’m getting there. So in my wildest Canadian dreams, I would be sent back to China to work for the Globe, and usually these you take rotations, like you stay in a country for a couple of years. So I would want to be there for five to six years and then I would return to Toronto either as an editor role or even become their foreign editor, which is a pretty senior position at the newspaper. Although we don’t know where journalism would be in ten years. So that would be my ideal dream job in journalism.

Now, not likely to happen. A more realistic route is I still end up doing journalism-adjacent jobs, either in communication or content marketing, however you want to call it. Because every big company or even a small organization needs communications team, right? So that’s where I want to be at. But eventually I want to take on a more senior role, either the director of communications or even at a VP level because it does come with more responsibilities and more money. Hell yeah.
